{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0
{\fonttbl
{\f0\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype NULL;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Symbol;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Dingbats;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Bitstream Vera Sans;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Courier New;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset0\fprq0\fttruetype Wingdings;}}
{\colortbl
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\stylesheet
{\*\cs15\sl240\slmult1\fs20\sbasedon28 Footnote Text;}
{\s29\sl240\slmult1\sb99\sa99\f0\fs24\sbasedon28 Normal (Web);}
{\*\cs35\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 1;}
{\*\cs36\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 2;}
{\*\cs37\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 3;}
{\*\cs38\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 4;}
{\*\cs39\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 5;}
{\*\cs40\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 6;}
{\*\cs41\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 7;}
{\*\cs42\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 8;}
{\*\cs43\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 2 9;}
{\*\cs66\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 4;}
{\*\cs11\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\i\sbasedon9 Emphasis;}
{\*\cs54\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs20 RTF_Num 5 1;}
{\*\cs55\sl240\slmult1\f5\fs20 RTF_Num 5 2;}
{\*\cs56\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 3;}
{\*\cs57\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 4;}
{\s16\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Hand List;}
{\*\cs59\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 6;}
{\*\cs60\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 7;}
{\*\cs61\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 8;}
{\s33\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Numbered List;}
{\*\cs28\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\lang1046\sbasedon8 Normal;}
{\s6\sl240\slmult1\tx1584\sbasedon30\snext28 Chapter Heading;}
{\s8\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 Default;}
{\s78\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Triangle List;}
{\s75\sl240\slmult1\sa118\f0\fs24\sbasedon8 Text body;}
{\s31\sl240\slmult1\tx431\sbasedon18\snext28 Numbered Heading 2;}
{\s32\sl240\slmult1\tx431\sbasedon19\snext28 Numbered Heading 3;}
{\s23\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\sbasedon8 Index;}
{\s74\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Star List;}
{\s77\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Tick List;}
{\s26\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720\sbasedon33 Lower Case List;}
{\*\cs58\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 5;}
{\*\cs44\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 3 1;}
{\s5\sl240\slmult1\sb118\sa118\f0\fs20\i\sbasedon8 Caption;}
{\*\cs76\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\sbasedon9 texto1;}
{\s3\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Box List;}
{\*\cs13\sl240\slmult1\sbasedon28 Endnote Text;}
{\*\cs62\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs20 RTF_Num 5 9;}
{\s27\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720\sbasedon28 Lower Roman List;}
{\s20\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Heart List;}
{\*\cs9\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\sbasedon28 Default Paragraph Font;}
{\*\cs63\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 1;}
{\*\cs64\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 2;}
{\*\cs65\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 3;}
{\s4\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Bullet List;}
{\*\cs67\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 5;}
{\*\cs68\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 6;}
{\*\cs69\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 7;}
{\*\cs70\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 8;}
{\*\cs71\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 RTF_Num 6 9;}
{\s79\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720\sbasedon33 Upper Case List;}
{\s30\sl240\slmult1\tx431\sbasedon17\snext28 Numbered Heading 1;}
{\*\cs12\sl240\slmult1\fs20\super Endnote Reference;}
{\*\cs24\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24 Internet Link;}
{\s80\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720\sbasedon33 Upper Roman List;}
{\s10\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Diamond List;}
{\*\cs21\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\sbasedon9 Hyperlink;}
{\*\cs14\sl240\slmult1\fs20\super Footnote Reference;}
{\s72\sl240\slmult1\tx1584\sbasedon30\snext28 Section Heading;}
{\s25\sl240\slmult1\f0\fs24\sbasedon75 List;}
{\s34\sl240\slmult1\f5\sbasedon28 Plain Text;}
{\s17\sl240\slmult1\sb440\sa60\f4\fs34\b\sbasedon28\snext28 Heading 1;}
{\*\cs53\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs24 RTF_Num 4 9;}
{\s22\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Implies List;}
{\s1\sl240\slmult1\sb99\sa99\f0\fs27\b\sbasedon28  heading 3;}
{\s73\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Square List;}
{\*\cs45\sl240\slmult1\fs24 RTF_Num 4 1;}
{\*\cs46\sl240\slmult1\f5\fs24 RTF_Num 4 2;}
{\*\cs47\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs24 RTF_Num 4 3;}
{\*\cs48\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 4 4;}
{\*\cs49\sl240\slmult1\f5\fs24 RTF_Num 4 5;}
{\*\cs50\sl240\slmult1\f6\fs24 RTF_Num 4 6;}
{\*\cs51\sl240\slmult1\f2\fs24 RTF_Num 4 7;}
{\*\cs52\sl240\slmult1\f5\fs24 RTF_Num 4 8;}
{\s18\sl240\slmult1\sb440\sa60\f4\fs28\b\sbasedon28\snext28 Heading 2;}
{\s19\sl240\slmult1\sb440\sa60\f4\fs24\b\sbasedon28\snext28 Heading 3;}
{\s7\sl240\slmult1\fi-431\li720 Dashed List;}
{\s2\sl240\slmult1\li1440\ri1440\sa119\sbasedon28 Block Text;}}
{\*\listtable
{\list\listtemplateid1028\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelfollow0\fi-360\li720{\leveltext\'01\'b7 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\f2}\listid1010}
{\list\listtemplateid1029\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelfollow0\fi-428\li720{\leveltext\'01\'b7 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\f2}\listid1037}}
{\*\listoverridetable
{\listoverride\listoverridecount0\listid1010\levelnfc23\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelfollow0\fi-360\li720{\leveltext\'01\'b7 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\f2\ls1}
{\listoverride\listoverridecount0\listid1037\levelnfc23\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelfollow0\fi-428\li720{\leveltext\'01\'b7 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\f2\ls2}}

\kerning0\cf0\ftnbj\fet2\ftnstart1\ftnnar\aftnnrlc\ftnstart1\ftnrestart\ftnrstpg\aftnstart1\aftnrestart\aendnotes\aenddoc\facingp\titlepg{\info}\deftab720\viewkind1\paperw11905\paperh16837\margl1440\margr1440\widowctl
\sectd\sbknone\colsx0\margtsxn2880\marglsxn2880\margrsxn2880\pgncont\ltrsect
\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs48\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch METARECICLAGEM}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\i\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Bia Rinaldi}{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\page What is MetaReciclagem?}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch A group of people with a common aim. A collaborative methodology. A social technology project.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch All these descriptions were given by participants of MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s actions and mailing list. If there are many possible ways of seeing it, let\uc1\u8217\'92s start by its name.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93Reciclagem\uc1\u8221\'94 means \uc1\u8220\'93Recycling\uc1\u8221\'94 in Portuguese, which basically describes the group\uc1\u8217\'92s main activity: to recycle old computers. \uc1\u8220\'93Meta\uc1\u8221\'94 comes from \uc1\u8220\'93Met\'e1fora\uc1\u8221\'94, \uc1\u8220\'93Metaphor\uc1\u8221\'94. So what does the title mean?}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Projeto Met\'e1fora (Metaphor Project) was a mailing list created to discuss new technology in everyday life. It lasted 16 months and ended in 2003, but its impact and results \uc1\u8211\'96 one of them is MetaReciclagem \uc1\u8211\'96 are still around. That\uc1\u8217\'92s what Miguel Caetano, a Portuguese journalist from Lisbon, has been trying to analyse. He\uc1\u8217\'92s writing his M.A. thesis on Met\'e1fora. And in order to understand how it all began, it is helpful to have some background on the original project.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Projeto Met\'e1fora}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch The mailing list Projeto Met\'e1fora was created in June 28th, 2002, in Brazil. In less than three months, there were a dozen projects in areas such as education, art and media, from a series of public interventions to discussions of (what turned out to be) the Brazilian tactical media lab, MidiaTaticaBrasil. Felipe Fonseca, one of its members, describes it as a free incubator for collaborative projects. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch All those projects followed a few principles, notes Felipe: }
\par{\listtext\pard\fi-360\li720\sb120\bullet 	}\pard\plain{\ltrpar\ql\fi-360\li720\sb120\s28\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}{\*\abilist\abilistid1010\abilistparentid0\abilistlevel1\abistartat1{\abifieldfont Symbol}{\abilistdecimal .}{\abilistdelim %L}{\abiliststyle Bullet List}}{\*\pn\pnql\pnstart1\pnlvlblt{\pntxtb\bullet}}\ls1\ilvl0\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch They emphasized the idea of collaborative development, inspired by the free software movement. By publishing the knowledge created during the process, it would be easier to replicate the projects; therefore, they were all based on copyleft and free knowledge concepts;}
\par}{\listtext\pard\fi-360\li720\sb120\bullet 	}\pard\plain{\ltrpar\ql\fi-360\li720\sb120\s28\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}{\*\abilist\abilistid1010\abilistparentid0\abilistlevel1\abistartat1{\abifieldfont Symbol}{\abilistdecimal .}{\abilistdelim %L}{\abiliststyle Bullet List}}{\*\pn\pnql\pnstart1\pnlvlblt{\pntxtb\bullet}}\ls1\ilvl0\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch A different perspective from other projects that deal with technology. We did not want to train people to become accustomed to computers, but transform technology to transform their lives;}
\par}{\listtext\pard\fi-360\li720\sb120\bullet 	}\pard\plain{\ltrpar\ql\fi-360\li720\sb120\s28\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}{\*\abilist\abilistid1010\abilistparentid0\abilistlevel1\abistartat1{\abifieldfont Symbol}{\abilistdecimal .}{\abilistdelim %L}{\abiliststyle Bullet List}}{\*\pn\pnql\pnstart1\pnlvlblt{\pntxtb\bullet}}\ls1\ilvl0\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch An effort to keep the conversation free from computer jargons, so that anyone could understand, and open to anyone willing to participate (subscriptions to the list were unrestricted). There was also a concern to fight notions that technology is something apart from everyday life and that online and offline activities are opposite. }
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93I never subscribed to the list because the number of messages sent everyday was so huge that I thought I wouldn\uc1\u8217\'92t be able to digest it all\uc1\u8221\'94, says Miguel Caetano. By the time Met\'e1fora was created, he worked as technology journalist for an online publication in Portugal and started watching the list closely. \uc1\u8220\'93I was regularly following the creation of new subprojects.\uc1\u8221\'94 }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Caetano then decided to write about the project he considers to be at \uc1\u8220\'93the cutting edge of cyberculture, the most advanced project in the technology-artistic vanguard\uc1\u8221\'94. \uc1\u8220\'93And in Portuguese language.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch A technical project}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch All projects discussed by Met\'e1fora dealt with a new way to use technology. Felipe explains that MetaReciclagem was born to provide the physical infrastructure to some of them.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\i\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93In a given point, we realized we would need computers to get those projects running. Someone sent the group a link to accr.org website, an American organization that delivers used computers to NGOs. A member suggested we ask for donations. Other pointed out that transportation would be too expensive, and a lot of Brazilian companies and people also had old computers. What if we asked them? We were not an organization, how could we formally justify and process the donations? A draft of what we then called MetaReciclagem was created on our wiki site.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\i\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Who was the author? Everyone, I guess. Then I met Agente Cidad\'e3o, a NGO working with what they call \uc1\u8216\'91Social Logistics\uc1\u8217\'92: they pick up donations all around S\'e3o Paulo and deliver them to charities. At that point, they had some computers and didn't know what to do with them. I talked about our project and in less than one month we started working together. They offered us exactly what we needed \uc1\u8211\'96 space, old computers, internet access and energy, but, furthermore, the most important: a goal. We would transform technology using free software to help people in need.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch To restore computers which are broken or considered obsolete, put them running Linux and donate the machines to social organizations: that was the basic idea. The choice for free software is not only political: it\uc1\u8217\'92s based on hardware demand \uc1\u8211\'96 most donated machines have low processing power and need \uc1\u8220\'93lighter\uc1\u8221\'94 software \uc1\u8211\'96 and protects the group from being accused of software piracy. Hernani Dimantas, other active member of Met\'e1fora, emphasizes that MetaReciclagem is probably the first project which \uc1\u8220\'93came from of the internet and became real\uc1\u8221\'94.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch  }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Searching for definition}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch If it is such a pragmatic project, with purpose and methodology, why is there such a diversity of definitions?}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Felipe emphasizes that there isn\uc1\u8217\'92t a particular group called MetaReciclagem. \uc1\u8220\'93We are not MetaReciclagem, we do MetaReciclagem. We use (the title) only to identify some of our actions.\uc1\u8221\'94 It is a decentralized movement, without hierarchy. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93It\uc1\u8217\'92s a pirate operation\uc1\u8221\'94, says Hernani. \uc1\u8220\'93People get together when they want to, and use MetaReciclagem as a form of expression. That\uc1\u8217\'92s why the voluntary side of our work is so big. The connection between us follows the logic of our individual projects.\uc1\u8221\'94 }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch In a group formed by people with such distinct backgrounds and interests, participation is also variable. Since people involved in the actions are not usually paid to do so \uc1\u8211\'96 they generally work on other projects with governments or NGOs not necessarily connected to MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s work. To Dalton Martins, this is the reason why they can be called a movement, and not an institution.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch There are disadvantages. Despite the relative success of its actions, many of them are partnerships with government or NGOs. Although MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s tactic is to keep an open dialogue with them \uc1\u8211\'96 instead of facing big companies, for instance \uc1\u8211\'96 to depend on other organizations and politicians (and therefore on their agendas) does not give the actions the necessary stability to grow and produce. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch MetaReciclagem is\uc1\u8230\'85}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch If there are many voices inside MetaReciclagem, then there are many ways to describe it. Some of them were presented at a recent group meeting:}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93MetaReciclagem is a project that tries (and miraculously achieves) to make computers that were considered obsolete work with free software, and to introduce people in need to the idea of digital inclusion. To me, it\uc1\u8217\'92s also a chance to learn and teach others how free software works.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93It\uc1\u8217\'92s construction of technologic independence to political and social actions\uc1\u8221\'94 }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93Garbage is only garbage because it\uc1\u8217\'92s in the wrong place. Things at their right places have value. To some, it\uc1\u8217\'92s nothing, to others\uc1\u8230\'85 it\uc1\u8217\'92s an inversion of values.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93It\uc1\u8217\'92s a great school, a place to look for help, where we can create.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93To recycle ideas, minds and hearts. To raise blue flowers in dry land.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93It\uc1\u8217\'92s a family with freedom of expression; although it is work, there is autonomy to come and go.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93It\uc1\u8217\'92s a collaborative methodology of technologic re-appropriation to social transformation.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Digital inclusion?}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Hernani notes that, although MetaReciclagem was supposed to be a pragmatic project of computer recycling from start, people started developing their own theories in time. That\uc1\u8217\'92s when it stopped being merely technical and showed a social aspect. What people involved in these actions think of them, however, changes. And this difference in points of view turns the project even more interesting.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch To Hernani, the group\uc1\u8217\'92s work is characteristic of a \uc1\u8220\'93third phase\uc1\u8221\'94 of digital inclusion. To restore computers and pass this ability to others is more than what other \uc1\u8220\'93digital inclusion actions\uc1\u8221\'94 are doing right now, he observes: to simply provide access to the internet and access to information was something done at the first stages of the movement. What MetaReciclagem does is provide people with means to produce their own knowledge and encourage this process.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Felipe, for instance, disagrees with the vision that MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s actions can classified as digital inclusion. Not that he\uc1\u8217\'92s against the movement for the right to universal access to computers connected to a network so people can interact. However, one could say this purpose is already being served by the electronic urn, he argues. \uc1\u8220\'93MetaReciclagem has a much deeper objective. We appropriate technology to provide a critical approach to the use of communication tools\uc1\u8221\'94; it\uc1\u8217\'92s not about \uc1\u8220\'93inclusion or exclusion\uc1\u8221\'94, but about \uc1\u8220\'93conscious, creative use\uc1\u8221\'94 of computers and internet. \uc1\u8220\'93This is why we did not choose to open a number of telecenters, but to work on research and development of new ways.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch What about Met\'e1fora?}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Projeto Met\'e1fora ended in October 2003. MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s \uc1\u8220\'93spores\uc1\u8221\'94, however, keep spreading and growing in other cities. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93Despite its force, vanguard and creativity, Met\'e1fora was too ambitious. Its force was divided into various projects\uc1\u8221\'94, thinks Miguel Caetano, the Portuguese journalist. In his opinion, \uc1\u8220\'93its philosophy was too anarchic and utopian to establish a long term project\uc1\u8221\'94. MetaReciclagem, on the other hand, \uc1\u8220\'93is not as radical. It has a technologic and social approach, is well-structured and seems to be efficient\uc1\u8221\'94. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch But he hopes that, one day, the group involved in Met\'e1fora may dedicate themselves to other projects. \uc1\u8220\'93I hope that, after working to establish MetaReciclagem, they would develop other projects created at the list, which are more related to cyberculture. Met\'e1fora is an authentic storage space for great ideas yet to be explored.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Santo Andr\'e9 \uc1\u8211\'96 Parque Escola}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Among trees and botanical gardens, MetaReciclagem found a perfect place to replicate its work and spread its ideas. Located in Santo Andr\'e9 \uc1\u8211\'96 a city near S\'e3o Paulo \uc1\u8211\'96 Parque Escola (School Park) was not planned, but put together as a jigsaw puzzle. Its structure was entirely built with recycled materials: old tires, discarded gates, containers and even a bus were transformed into buildings and classrooms. The park\uc1\u8217\'92s main goal is to draw attention to the importance of environmental preservation, and it organizes workshops and cultural activities related to the subject. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch We first heard about Parque Escola at II Semana de Inclus\'e3o Digital, a meeting about digital inclusion held in Brasilia, capital of Brazil. Dalton Martins and Felipe Fonseca, from ProjetoMetaFora, were at the event, where they were introduced by Hernani Dimantas to Solange Ferrarezi, assistant Secretary of Education of Santo Andr\'e9 municipal government. Through her, we were introduced later to the architect that created School Park, Luiz Henrique Zanetta. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch With 665 thousand inhabitants, Santo Andr\'e9 has a PT administration (politicians from the Workers\uc1\u8217\'92 Party).}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch At a meeting, we presented our plans to Zanetta, who realized MetaReciclagem shares the same principles with Parque Escola: both have recycling as a premise. He welcomed the project and gave us the necessary structure to work in the park. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch In August 2003, MetaReciclagem occupied a container at the park and created a computer recycling laboratory. At that time we received our first donation: 50 computers. By then, we did not have a \uc1\u8220\'93target\uc1\u8221\'94, a particular group of people to work with yet. Later, we met Jorge Gouveia, of the Departamento de Gera\'e7\'e3o de Renda e Trabalho (Work and Income Generation Department), who provided a public for our first action: cooperatives assisted by the local government cooperative incubator.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Sixteen people \uc1\u8211\'96 members of eight cooperative associations \uc1\u8211\'96 were invited to attend classes with MetaReciclagem. They learned how to use word processors, spreadsheet programs, web browsers and other basic computer programs. When preparing a course, we try to convey the idea that technology can be an instrument of change. Computers can be a great help at daily tasks, but, more importantly, they can also be used to discover new ways of expression and connection with other people, such as collaborative websites and blogs. At the end of the process, which lasted three months, computers were donated to each association.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Soon we noticed that five cooperatives have put the machines aside. All complained of the same thing: the lack of a computer printer. The fact is that cooperatives (as well as other companies in Brazil) still rely heavily on printed documents; they need to send letters through regular mail and fill in bureaucratic forms to hand in to the government. Looking back, Dalton Martins thinks it\uc1\u8217\'92s clear that the experience would have proved more successful if there were printers available to donate along with the computers.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Those five cooperatives did not remain in touch with MetaReciclagem. The other three, however, managed to find printers and use the machines. These are TextilCooper (a textile association with 100 members), CoopCicla (works with garbage recycling) and Olho Vivo (sewing association with 30 members, one of the oldest cooperatives in Santo Andr\'e9).}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch WiFi}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Besides the experimental lab, MetaReciclagem created a videowall and a WiFi spot covering the entire park. It is now the first public park in Brazil with wireless internet. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Computers as a work of art}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch All the computers recycled and donated (there are some in the park\uc1\u8217\'92s library) have been painted by a local artist called Glauco Paiva. His colorful and creative work uses machines as a support for his art. To Hernani Dimantas, Glauco\uc1\u8217\'92s collaboration totally changed the project. \uc1\u8220\'93MetaReciclagem gained a new form of expression. A computer is transformed into a work of art, doesn\uc1\u8217\'92t matter if it\uc1\u8217\'92s old or not. Until then, recycling language was grey.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Digital Park}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Epac (Escola Parque de Arte e Ci\'eancia \uc1\u8211\'96 Art and Science School Park) is a project of science & technology popularization aimed at public school teachers and students. The idea is to unite science, art and everyday life. At Epac, teachers will have the chance to conduct scientific experiments so that students can see what they have only read about in books. The plan is to create a science museum, an art gallery and to offer workshops and courses.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch MetaReciclagem is helping implement the physical and logical infrastructure of the project, Parque Digital (Digital Park). Dalton develops software, computer games and all kinds of experiments that involve recycling.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Santo Andr\'e9 \uc1\u8211\'96 Sacadura Cabral}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch After the course given to cooperatives, we wanted to teach young people how to recycle computers so they could start their own business. With the help of Assessoria da Juventude, a governmental department that develops projects aimed at youth, we taught a class of 12 people appointed by the Assessoria. They were all from Sacadura Cabral, a slum recently re-urbanized by Santo Andr\'e9 government.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch A teacher, Julio Milan, was hired and students attended daily classes for a month, in April 2004. They learned how to assemble and maintain computers, install Linux, etc. The purpose was, at the end of the course, to give support to students willing to start their own commercial enterprise.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Of 12 young people, only 2 remained, Erick Bento Dias Ferreira and Andr\'e9 Garr\'e3o, who founded a cooperative called InforMeta. We helped them by finding clients and donating computers that were sold to provide cash for the enterprise, in order to hire an accountant, buy office equipment and so on. The experience has been successful, for they are already working and being paid. Now the plan is to replicate Sacadura Cabral experience in other communities.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch At InforMeta, Andr\'e9 has worked to sell computers and provide technical assistance, while Erick has focused in actions inside the community. With friends, he is transforming the local community center, which offered only a literacy course until then. Now MetaReciclagem occupies two rooms at the place: one is a telecenter and a laboratory for network solutions, and other is a computer recycling lab, where Dalton gives classes.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93We want to provide means for them to build their own knowledge and gain autonomy\uc1\u8221\'94, says Dalton. \uc1\u8220\'93They are already developing a project of sharing internet connection through WiFi network between houses, market places, etc. It\uc1\u8217\'92s all being planned and made by them, we only give support. And those students who are really interested will receive training at InforMeta.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch With the WiFi spot and the recycling workshops, the idea is to offer internet access and cheaper recycled computers to the community. This allows people to have computers in places other than telecenters, notes Hernani Dimantas. That is positive, he says, because it dissociates computers from work and gives voice to people, at a low cost. \uc1\u8220\'93LigaN\'f3is is a proof that people want other things than just chat rooms and instant message programs. And that\uc1\u8217\'92s our purpose\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch ABC Free Software Project}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch MetaReciclagem is heading an effort to unify free software groups in ABC area (the cities surrounding S\'e3o Paulo: Santo Andr\'e9, S\'e3o Bernardo do Campo, S\'e3o Caetano). Projeto Software Livre ABC (ABC Free Software Project) is trying to create a discussion forum so that groups can collaborate with each other. They hope to form an independent group that will pressure the government to use free software and encourage local activities. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch MetaReciclagem also wants to expand its actions, by providing computers and developing projects in other cities, \uc1\u8220\'93places where there\uc1\u8217\'92s a need of expression through technology\uc1\u8221\'94, says Dalton.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93We don\uc1\u8217\'92t have this belief that a telecenter is to provide access to information; it\uc1\u8217\'92s much more than that, we want to use it as a language. When I have a good command of the technology involved in this language, I have the ability to express myself with it, and that creates a little \uc1\u8216\'91problem\uc1\u8217\'92\uc1\u8221\'94, jokes Dalton: \uc1\u8220\'93this can increase actions in a way we can\uc1\u8217\'92t even imagine. That\uc1\u8217\'92s what\uc1\u8217\'92s interesting, what\uc1\u8217\'92s capable of changing someone\uc1\u8217\'92s head.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch To sum up, he says, MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s purpose is \uc1\u8220\'93to create decentralized actions and establish ourselves as a force at technology recycling and free software production\uc1\u8221\'94.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Agente Cidad\'e3o}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Agente Cidad\'e3o (Citizen Agent) is a non-governmental organization that provides transportation for donated material. They pick up beds, mattresses, furniture and any other items people want donate of at their houses and deliver to charities. Felipe Fonseca met them in early 2003 and learned they received old computers but didn\uc1\u8217\'92t know what to do with them. The partnership soon began: MetaReciclagem occupied a space in their office (located in a shopping center in S\'e3o Paulo) to create our first experimental laboratory, where we worked to assemble the machines, install free software and prepare them for donation to organizations. Allies who worked in the place were Dalton Martins, Eduardo Mota, Fernando Henrique and Felipe Fuches.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch With Agente Cidad\'e3o, we organized events and met future partners: }
\par{\listtext\pard\fi-428\li720\sb120\bullet 	}\pard\plain{\ltrpar\ql\fi-428\li720\sb120\s28\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}{\*\abilist\abilistid1037\abilistparentid0\abilistlevel1\abistartat1{\abifieldfont Symbol}{\abilistdecimal .}{\abilistdelim %L}{\abiliststyle Bullet List}}{\*\pn\pnql\pnstart1\pnlvlblt{\pntxtb\bullet}}\ls2\ilvl0\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Cybersocial}{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}was an event that lasted one month and took place in SP Market shopping center. There was a telecenter open to the public which offered internet access and workshops.}
\par}{\listtext\pard\fi-428\li720\sb120\bullet 	}\pard\plain{\ltrpar\ql\fi-428\li720\sb120\s28\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}{\*\abilist\abilistid1037\abilistparentid0\abilistlevel1\abistartat1{\abifieldfont Symbol}{\abilistdecimal .}{\abilistdelim %L}{\abiliststyle Bullet List}}{\*\pn\pnql\pnstart1\pnlvlblt{\pntxtb\bullet}}\ls2\ilvl0\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Autolabs }{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}was part of CAJU project (Centro de A\'e7\'e3o Juvenil, Youth Action Center). 45 computers were donated to create three telecenters in the east area of S\'e3o Paulo. MetaReciclagem also offered technical support to the telecenters, a workshop about computer assembly and maintenance, and orientation to 15 people with a scholarship (Bolsa-trabalho) from the local government to form their own enterprise.}
\par}{\listtext\pard\fi-428\li720\sb120\bullet 	}\pard\plain{\ltrpar\ql\fi-428\li720\sb120\s28\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}{\*\abilist\abilistid1037\abilistparentid0\abilistlevel1\abistartat1{\abifieldfont Symbol}{\abilistdecimal .}{\abilistdelim %L}{\abiliststyle Bullet List}}{\*\pn\pnql\pnstart1\pnlvlblt{\pntxtb\bullet}}\ls2\ilvl0\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Through Agente Cidad\'e3o we met }{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}Corrente Viva}{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}, a NGO incubator which assists community groups. They connect organizations so they can exchange experiences and be better prepared to offer professional services. Recently, 27 members from this network attended a workshop ran by MetaReciclagem (Felipe and Elly Chagas) at Galeria Olido, about communication and low technology. Now the idea is to establish a partnership: MetaReciclagem will be responsible for the communication plan of Corrente Viva.}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Agente Cidad\'e3o was the first to provide donations, space and a purpose for us to work. The partnership lasted until October 2004, when the organization lost part of its office space in the shopping center and decided that MetaReciclagem will be only one of the benefited groups they attend. We no longer work there, but still received donations.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Galeria Olido}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Olido was an old movie theater in the central area of S\'e3o Paulo, recently reformed by the local government. It is now open to the public as a cultural center, which offers many activities and a telecenter.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Some MetaReciclagem allies are working at Olido Gallery: Elly Chagas (activities coordinator), Willians Pedroso, Julio Milan, Joe Nascimento and Valquiria Friedrich (monitors).}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch All of them are hired for Cybernarium project, part of the @lis (Alliance for the Information Society)}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Linux installation andSuse Slackware and RedHat/Fedora installation. Valquiria runs workshops about hardware painting and Elly, about internet search and cyber activism.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Elly was also responsible, along with Felipe, for a low tech collaboration workshop, offered for non-governmental organizations of Corrente Viva. 27 people participated. They discussed network communication and the use of new technologies. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch LigaN\'f3is}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch LigaN\'f3is is an online collaborative site for telecenter monitors and community communication groups. All content is created by the users, and each user can have his/her own weblog. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Felipe Fonseca, developer of the site, says the idea came up in 2003, when MetaReciclagem was getting bigger: we were receiving donations from Agente Cidad\'e3o and were ready to open our first independent telecenters. That\uc1\u8217\'92s when he started discussing with some people the possibility of creating a system which would also have an impact on economy. The plan was to buy or receive used computers, which would be restored by cooperatives (with free software) and sold for cheaper prices to users and small commercial enterprises. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch But provide access to the internet for what? \uc1\u8220\'93So that people could increase the audience of big commercial portals?\uc1\u8221\'94 Felipe then thought of creating a collaborative website, \uc1\u8220\'93to show that, since its beginning, internet is not about access to information, but about connecting people\uc1\u8221\'94.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch LigaN\'f3is (\uc1\u8220\'93ConnectUs\uc1\u8221\'94) was created sometime later. It is a free publication site, not moderated and simple to use. The experience has been successful. Today it has more than 800 registered users and around 600 visitors a day.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Metalinux}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Metalinux was born as a Linux distribution to old computers, a system that would answer MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s technologic requirements. Most of the machines donated have the following profile:}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Processor: Pentium 75Mhz~200Mhz\line Memory: 16Mb ~ 32 Mb\line Hard disk: none ~ 2 Gb}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s29\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Focusing on those demands (machines with low processing power), Fernando Henrique  started developing a first version of Metalinux on May 2003. He chose Gentoo as a platform due to its good performance running games and multimedia applications. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s29\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Version 0.5 was the first to be publicly released. The following versions \uc1\u8211\'96 from 0.6 to 0.9 \uc1\u8211\'96 had improvements. By the time Fernando was developing version 1.0 and a new generation of Metalinux, Metalinux 2 (this one, based on Suse Linux), an accident with his hard drive on January 2004 caused the loss of all data. Since no one else had copies of Metalinux available, Fernando began to work on the third generation of the distro, based on RedHat9 and Mandrak9. In time, he incorporated some characteristics of other distributions, such as Suse, Slackware, Debian and Conectiva. Until then, Fernando was the only developer.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s29\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Due to a lack of communication with other members of MetaReciclagem, Metalinux was not being used by in the machines recycled and donated. Slackware was being installed instead.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Fernando then decided to keep a record of his work and created Komain, documentation on how to create a Linux distro from scratch. When other MetaReciclagem members talked about the need of a distro of their own, Fernando suggested that the group contributes in the development of a version along with Komain Linux group (}{\field{\*\fldinst {\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0} HYPERLINK "http://komain.codigolivre.org.br/"}}{\*\fldrslt}}{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}). Now there are eight developers.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Partnerships and events }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch In association with }{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}Sampa.org}{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0} and }{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}Banco do Brasil}{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}, MetaReciclagem opened two telecenters, one in Cap\'e3o Redondo, the other in Jarinu.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Cap\'e3o Redondo}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Cap\'e3o Redondo is one of the poorest and most violent areas in the city of S\'e3o Paulo. Along with Associa\'e7\'e3o Chico Mendes, a local community association, a telecenter was opened with the computers donated by the federal government and restored by MetaReciclagem. The group ran a workshop of hardware painting on the very first day. Elly Chagas describes the enthusiasm felt on that Friday:}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch \uc1\u8220\'93We had the collaboration of many people, whose names I don\uc1\u8217\'92t recall, but cannot forget their happy faces. Beto is a local }{\f0\fs22\i\lang1033{\*\listtag0}grafiteiro }{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}(one who writes/draws graffiti on walls) who wanted to learn more about colors mixture. At the end, he was very satisfied. Opening day showed the force that work can achieve when everybody\uc1\u8217\'92s participating, without restrictions.\uc1\u8221\'94}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch At the following week, all the computers were stolen. \uc1\u8220\'93They took the computers. Took everything else that cannot be explained in words\uc1\u8221\'94, says Elly. \uc1\u8220\'93But force, work and collaboration are still with us. }{\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0}We\uc1\u8217\'92re still standing.\uc1\u8221\'94 MetaReciclagem is presently waiting for Sampa.org to decide when Chico Mendes telecenter may be reopened.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1046{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Jarinu}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Jarinu is a small rural town 70 km away from S\'e3o Paulo. In September, Dalton Martins, Glauco Paiva and Elly Chagas were there to open a telecenter with 15 computers in a room of the local women\uc1\u8217\'92s association (Associa\'e7\'e3o das Mulheres de Jarinu). }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch During the week, they installed and painted the machines. \uc1\u8220\'93Among children impressed with the colors of the computers and citizens who said our work would only distract people\uc1\u8217\'92s attention, work was being done\uc1\u8221\'94, remembers Elly. When the lab was finally ready, they already had their first users, such as Robson, an 11-year-old enterprising young man who showed great interest for all the activity. \uc1\u8220\'93Who knows, what we did is not a guarantee of anything\uc1\u8221\'94, thinks Elly, \uc1\u8220\'93but maybe it can help a kid with so much vision, who already knows that the world is not only Jarinu\uc1\u8221\'94.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1046{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Other projects}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1046{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Pontos de Cultura (Culture Points)}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Technical and conceptual support to the development of Pontos de Cultura Project, from Brazilian Culture Ministery}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1046{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Waag / Sarai Platform}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Conceptual support from Waag Foundation and Sarai NGO for a \uc1\u8220\'93knowledge exchange\uc1\u8221\'94 between MetaReciclagem and similar activities in the south hemisphere.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Oficina N\'f4made}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Workshop at Sesc Pomp\'e9ia (S\'e3o Paulo) with Belgian artist and researcher Etienne Delacroix about symbolic deconstruction and esthetic experimentation with used computers.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Tactical Media \uc1\u8211\'96 Next Five Minutes}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch MetaReciclagem held an exposition of a recycled telecenter and ran a workshop about collaboration networks on the event M\'eddia T\'e1tica Brasil (Tactical Media Brazil), in February 2003. Felipe Fonseca went to Amsterdam in September 2003 to represent the project in Next Five Minutes festival and talk about appropriation of technology. }
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Suporte.MetaReciclagem}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Website directed to technical support to MetaReciclagem\uc1\u8217\'92s actions. }{\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0}Under construction.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1046{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Xemel\'ea}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Website about digital culture and free software. Under construction.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1046{\*\listtag0}
\par}\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\b\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch MetaOng.info}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\s28\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs22\lang1033{\*\listtag0}\abinodiroverride\ltrch Online collaborative publication about third sector and social enterprise.}
\par\pard\plain\ltrpar\ql\sb120\sl360\slmult1\itap0{\f0\fs24\lang1033{\*\listtag0}}}